Improve definition of exponentiation. (#3285)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/arrays.tex

\subsection{Element-wise Exponentiation}\label{element-wise-exponentiation}

> Exponentiation \lstinline!a ^ b! always return a \lstinline!Real! scalar value, and it is required that \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!b! are scalar \lstinline!Real! or \lstinline!Integer! values.

Reviewer: Grammar:
```suggestion
Exponentiation \lstinline!a ^ b! always returns a \lstinline!Real! scalar value, and it is required that \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!b! are scalar \lstinline!Real! or \lstinline!Integer! values.
```

The result should correspond to mathematical exponentiation (ideally the correctly rounded result based on the inputs) with the following special cases:
\begin{itemize}

> \item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0$ for an \lstinline!Integer! expression \lstinline!b! the result is $0.0$.

Reviewer: This looks dubious to me; with an integer exponent one could expect the result to be equivalent to `product(fill(a, b))`.  Why can't we make it an error?

Author: Yes. it should be, just a stupid typo.

Reviewer: Good!  1.0 is much better than 0.0, but when I brought this up at Wolfram MathCore there were also others who expressed a preference for making it an error instead.  Seems like a perfect detail for a language poll.

Author: Resolving, have discussed at phone meeting.

> \item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0$ for an \lstinline!Integer! expression \lstinline!b! the result is $0.0$.

Author: ```suggestion
\item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0$ for an \lstinline!Integer! expression \lstinline!b! the result is $1.0$.
```
This is the same as product(fill(a, b)) and is good for polynomials, where `sum(a[i+1]*x^i for i in 0:n)` now will work also for x=0.

> \item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! is an \lstinline!Integer! or a \lstinline!Real! having an integer value, the result is defined as $\pm |a|^b$, with sign depending on whether \lstinline!b! is even (positive) or odd (negative).

Reviewer: Is it necessary to allow the `Real` numbers with zero fractional part here?  The special dependency on certain values of a `Real` expression seems messy to deal with, in particular if we think of the interactions with a unit system.  (This concern was also raised when I brought up this PR internally at Wolfram MathCore.)

The clean alternative would be:
```suggestion
\item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! is a non-zero \lstinline!Integer!, the result is defined as $\pm |a|^b$, with sign depending on whether \lstinline!b! is even (positive) or odd (negative).
\item When \lstinline!b! is \lstinline!Real! it is required that $\text{\lstinline!a!} > 0$.
```

Then I think one could make it even better by combining both rules for an `Integer` exponent into a single item:
> When \lstinline!b! is \lstinline!Integer! the result is defined by repeated multiplication of \lstinline!a!; for a non-negative \lstinline!b! it is equivalent to \lstinline!product(fill(a, b))!, for a non-positive \lstinline!b! it is equivalent to \lstinline!1 / product(fill(a, -b))!, and note that the two cases agree when \lstinline!b! is zero.

Author: > Is it necessary to allow the `Real` numbers with zero fractional part here? The special dependency on certain values of a `Real` expression seems messy to deal with, in particular if we think of the interactions with a unit system. (This concern was also raised when I brought up this PR internally at Wolfram MathCore.)

I would say that there is: backward compatibility, and compatibility with other languages (like C) I believe that Real numbers with zero fractional part makes sense.

However, I don't think we need to extend this special treatment to units.

To me the key insight is that the reason for making `0^0` undefined is that there is no unique limit when x and y go towards zero. However, if we know that the exponent is an integer the discussion about limit isn't relevant; the exponent is either zero or it isn't.

Author: And I don't think we should formally define `a^b` using repeated multiplication for some reasons:

- It is neither efficient (it is faster to compute `a^8` as `((a^2)^2)^2`) nor numerically optimal (round-off issues become a mess).
- If the base is also an integer we must first convert it to a real to avoid overflow
- It seems as is `a^4` and `a^4.0` are different - without any relation to each other. Thus, if we anyway need to explain that it is practically the same it seems better to define that it is the same - and then give a different non-normative explanation.

I agree that we can informally use it as non-normative text; and for symbolic manipulations it is useful.

Reviewer: Yes, perhaps _corresponds to_ is better than _is defined by_?
> When \lstinline!b! is \lstinline!Integer! the result corresponds to repeated multiplication of \lstinline!a!, with a negative \lstinline!b! handled as \lstinline!1 / (a ^ (-b))!.
>\begin{nonnormative}
> For a non-negative \lstinline!b! this makes \lstinline!a ^ b! conceptually equivalent to \lstinline!product(fill(a, b))!, for a non-positive \lstinline!b! it is conceptually equivalent to \lstinline!1 / product(fill(a, -b))!, and note that the two cases agree when \lstinline!b! is zero.
Implementations should avoid actually performing repeated multiplication for reasons of numerics and performance.
> \end{nonnormative}

Reviewer: > > Is it necessary to allow the `Real` numbers with zero fractional part here? The special dependency on certain values of a `Real` expression seems messy to deal with, in particular if we think of the interactions with a unit system. (This concern was also raised when I brought up this PR internally at Wolfram MathCore.)
> 
> I would say that there is: backward compatibility, and compatibility with other languages (like C) I believe that Real numbers with zero fractional part makes sense.

It is not that I have a problem with `Real` numbers with zero fractional part per se (especially not having worked on 32 bit platforms in the past), but that it is problematic that the semantics of the operation depends on whether the fractional part is zero or not.  Why don't we test this to see if we can find any library that performs exponentiation of a non-positive base and a `Real` exponent?

> However, I don't think we need to extend this special treatment to units.

For units, I believe one would need something even stronger: When `a` has non-empty unit in `a ^ b`, it is required that `b` is a constant `Integer` expression.

> To me the key insight is that the reason for making `0^0` undefined is that there is no unique limit when x and y go towards zero. However, if we know that the exponent is an integer the discussion about limit isn't relevant; the exponent is either zero or it isn't.

Ture, but I'm not sure it helps us resolve the more complicated questions.

Author: Specifically `(-a)^b` is `a^b*exp(i*pi*b)=a^b*(cos(b*pi)+i*sin(b*pi))`, for real `a>0` and `b`. And that is only real when `sin(b*pi)=0`, which happens when `b` has zero fractional part.

Reviewer: > One could, of course, prohibit `(-a)^b` for Real `b` even when it has a well-defined Real result for zero fractional parts - but to me that seems like an unnecessary restriction.

Rather than an unnecessary restriction, I see it as a way of leveraging the type system to make errors detectable at translation time rather than at runtime.

Author: > > One could, of course, prohibit `(-a)^b` for Real `b` even when it has a well-defined Real result for zero fractional parts - but to me that seems like an unnecessary restriction.
> 
> Rather than an unnecessary restriction, I see it as a way of leveraging the type system to make errors detectable at translation time rather than at runtime.

I don't see how we leverage anything. Both checking whether a is negative or whether b has zero fractional parts is normally done at runtime, since we cannot always check it at translation time - and it is the combination that is problematic.

Introducing a hard error for this doesn't make sense; it just breaks compatibility for no obvious reason.

Reviewer: We are leveraging the type system if we say it's safe to compute the power of any base as long as the exponent is an `Integer`.  Conversely, when the exponent is a `Real` we'd get a clean rule saying that the base must be positive (regardless the value of the exponent).

To me the two operations are different animals, and it is a perfect application of the type system to tell them apart.

Author: I just noticed that the suggestion contains "non-zero" as well. That (have been and) should only be applied for the _Real_ exponents with integer values since integer exponent should allow zero exponent, e.g., `(-2)^0` should be` |2|^0=1`. (There are many other ways of formulating this, e.g., the first item could generalize to say that integer exponent 0 gives `a^0=1.0`, regardless of the value for `a`.)

> \item Consequences of other exceptional situations, such as ($\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0.0$ for a \lstinline!Real b!,
> $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} < 0$, or $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! does not have an integer value) or overflow are undefined.

Reviewer: Skip mid-sentence line break:
```suggestion
\item Consequences of other exceptional situations, such as ($\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0.0$ for a \lstinline!Real b!, $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} < 0$, or $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! does not have an integer value) or overflow are undefined.
```

\end{itemize}

> Except for defining the special case of $0.0^0$ it corresponds to \lstinline[language=C]!pow(double a, double b)! in the ANSI~C library.
> \begin{nonnormative}

Reviewer: Now that we are defining the behavior in our own specification, the relation to ANSI-C should become non-normative (plus paragraph break):
```suggestion

\begin{nonnormative}
Except for defining the special case of $0.0^0$ it corresponds to \lstinline[language=C]!pow(double a, double b)! in the ANSI~C library.
```

The result is always \lstinline!Real! due to the potential for integer overflow and negative exponents.

> Treating an \lstinline!Integer! exponent special makes it possible to use $x^n$ in a power series.

Author: Sounds good.

> Treating an \lstinline!Integer! exponent special imply that we can freely use $x^n$ in a power-series.

Reviewer: Grammar and avoid _we_:
```suggestion
Treating an \lstinline!Integer! exponent special makes it possible to use $x^n$ in a power series.
```

\subsection{Element-wise Exponentiation}\label{element-wise-exponentiation}

> Exponentiation \lstinline!a ^ b! always returns a \lstinline!Real! scalar value, and it is required that \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!b! are scalar \lstinline!Real! or \lstinline!Integer! values.

Reviewer: I believe it's more correct to speak of _expression_ unless we mean something that can be evaluated at translation time:
```suggestion
Exponentiation \lstinline!a ^ b! always returns a \lstinline!Real! scalar value, and it is required that \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!b! are scalar \lstinline!Real! or \lstinline!Integer! expressions.
```

> The result should correspond to mathematical exponentiation (ideally the correctly rounded result based on the inputs) with the following special cases:

Reviewer: Unless _based on the inputs_ is trying to say something that I don't see, it is probably better to leave it out:
```suggestion
The result should correspond to mathematical exponentiation (ideally the correctly rounded result) with the following special cases:
```

Reviewer: Actually, since we don't speak of correctly rounded anywhere else in the specification, we probably shouldn't do it here either:
```suggestion
The result should correspond to mathematical exponentiation with the following special cases:
```

\begin{itemize}

> \item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0$ for an \lstinline!Integer! expression \lstinline!b! the result is $1.0$.

Reviewer: We can make this stronger:
```suggestion
\item For any value of \lstinline!a! (including $0.0$) and an \lstinline!Integer! $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0$, the result is $1.0$.
```

Author: I was a bit hesitant for this as we get overlapping cases, but the alternative would be to explain this a non-normative consequence and that seems a bit excessive.

\item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! is an \lstinline!Integer!, the result is defined as $\pm |a|^b$, with sign depending on whether \lstinline!b! is even (positive) or odd (negative).

> \item If $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! is a \lstinline!Real! having a non-zero integer value, the result is defined as $\pm |a|^b$, with sign depending on whether \lstinline!b! is even (positive) or odd (negative). This case is deprecated, and tools may warn once during a simulation if this occurs.

Reviewer: Line break:
```suggestion
\item
  If $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! is a \lstinline!Real! having a non-zero integer value, the result is defined as $\pm |a|^b$, with sign depending on whether \lstinline!b! is even (positive) or odd (negative).
  This case is deprecated, and tools may warn once during a simulation if this occurs.
```

Reviewer: Apart from the line break, what is the right amount of deprecation detail?  Wouldn't it be better to just say it's deprecated?
```suggestion
\item A deprecated semantics is to treat $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and a \lstinline!Real! \lstinline!b! having a non-zero integer value as if \lstinline!b! were an \lstinline!Integer!.
```

Author: Ok, avoids duplication and deprecated semantics referencing non-deprecated ones should be ok.

> \item Consequences of other exceptional situations, such as ($\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0.0$ for a \lstinline!Real b!, $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} < 0$, or $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! does not have an integer value) or overflow are undefined.

Reviewer: For the overflow part, we shouldn't repeat the general rule about undefined behavior in `\cref{evaluation-order}`.  (If we repeat the rule here, we should repeat it in all similar places as well, which would only harm readability.)

For the other part, it is probably the right time to also change the formulation from _undefined_ to some more direct variant of illegal.

Finally, considering that an `Integer` `b = 0` always gives the result 1.0, I think we should include the positive rule for a `Real` `a = 0.0` before talking about the illegal cases.
```suggestion
\item For $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} > 0$, the result is $0.0$.
\item
  Other exceptional situations are illegal.
  For example: $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} = 0.0$ for a \lstinline!Real b!, $\text{\lstinline!a!} = 0.0$ and $\text{\lstinline!b!} < 0$, or $\text{\lstinline!a!} < 0$ and \lstinline!b! does not have an integer value.
```

Reviewer: One can probably have different ways of defining the operator in mind, but for me it is natural to think of `a^b` with `Real` exponent as "reducible" to `exp(b * log(a))`, which is why I think of `a = 0` as an exceptional case that is quite different from `1^b`.

Author: Ok, then.

\end{itemize}

\begin{nonnormative}
Except for defining the special case of $0.0^0$ it corresponds to \lstinline[language=C]!pow(double a, double b)! in the ANSI~C library.

> The result is always \lstinline!Real! due to the potential for integer overflow and negative exponents.

Reviewer: While negative exponents is a very strong reason, I don't think that risk of overflow is a good one (after all, multiplying two `Integer` values still gives an `Integer` result, despite the risk of overflow):
```suggestion
The result is always \lstinline!Real! as negative exponents can give non-integer results also when both operands are \lstinline!Integer!.
```

Author: Ok. To me the risk of overflow is larger for exponentiation since the result grows so much faster, but on the other hand there's also a risk of real overflow.
